Bremen Vance
Evgeny Chukharev-Hudilaninen
English 516
December 20th, 2019
Visualizing Corpus Data
Within writing studies disciplines, scholars have accepted the numerous ideologies that comprise the field (Fulkerson, 2005; Lauer, 1984). Scholars have attempted to identify and group areas of the field to help clarify points of agreement and identify historical trends, all of which is important for navigating challenges such as beginning to study, writing a literature review, or applying disciplinary knowledge. In recent years, distance reading has been identified as a useful method for studying disciplinary trends (D. Mueller, 2012; D. N. Mueller, 2017). Distance reading was developed as a method in literary studies as an alternative to close reading, the careful and multivariant interpretive process designed to explicate the imbedded meanings in textual passages. Distant reading strives to uncover patterns that are not identifiable through linear readings (Moretti, 2013). The goal of this project is to establish a prototype web-interface for visualizing data collected from a specialized corpus of pedagogical materials. The goal is to establish techniques for using corpus data to create dynamic visualizations that allow users to explore and interact with quantitative corpus data.
Corpus linguistic methods produce rich data sets that often require numerous table, charts, and other visualizations and displays for readers to understand the findings. The visualization of data is a challenge that many researchers must face, and the challenge is compounded by the size and complexity of the data being presented. Large data sets, as corpora tend to be, present challenges for scholars that need to show multiple patterns with the text. Most academic visualizations are static print, designed for academic journals. However, a growing number of scholarly publications allow for digital submissions (e.g. Kairos, Present Tense, The Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy).  These digital publications open the possibility for leveraging the affordances of the web, such as dynamic documents and user-interaction.
A recent article in Karios demonstrates the potential of interactive visualizations in academic publications. Palmeri and McCorkle present interactive timelines tracking scholarship over the 100 year history of College English (Palmeri & McCorkle, 2017). Another visualization worth considering comes from the New York Times. The authors present data from national convention speeches, that is corpus data, in the form of interactive web graphics (Bostock, Carter, & Ericson, 2012). The problem is further complicated by corpora that grow, change, and include sub-sections. Through programing, it is possible to visualize corpus data for users in ways that make the findings more engaging, more comprehensible, and more persuasive.
In my project, I use D3 (D3 stands for Data-Driven Documents), an open source JavaScript library for creating data-driven visuals on the web. D3 facilitates the association of data with elements on in an HTML document, and it provides numerous tools for rendering charts based on data. The primary benefits of using D3 come from the ability to generate highly customizable data-driven visualizations based on web standard languages. Generating dynamic, web-native data visualizations is particularly useful for corpus research because of the rich, complex nature of the data being collected and the variety of potential analyses that can be performed.
While the benefits may be appealing, the complications involved in using D3 make it an under-utilized resource. As explained by Scott Murray, “D3 itself is not so complicated, but it operates in the domain of the web, and the web is complicated. Using D3 comfortably requires some prior knowledge of the web technologies with which it interacts, such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and SVG” (Murray, 2017, Chapter 1). The breadth of skills required to employ a library like D3 make it difficult for casual use, which is why many rely on more specialized tools for accomplishing data-visualization when possible. My goal, however, is to learn more about the development process for D3 projects to assess its use in a variety of future projects.


References
Bostock, M., Carter, S., & Ericson, M. (2012, September 7). At the National Conventions, the Words They Used. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/09/06/us/politics/convention-word-counts.html#!
Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. College Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654–687.
Lauer, J. M. (1984). Composition Studies: Dappled Discipline. Rhetoric Review, 3(1), 20–29.
Moretti, F. (2013). Distant reading. London ; New York: Verso.
Mueller, D. (2012). Grasping rhetoric and composition by its long tail: What graphs can tell us about the field’s changing shape. College Composition and Communication, 64(1), 195–223.
Mueller, D. N. (2017). Network sense: Methods for visualizing a discipline. Fort Collins, Colorado : Louisville, Colorado: The WAC Clearinghouse ; University Press of Colorado.
Murray, S. (2017). Interactive data visualization for the web: An introduction to designing with D3 / Scott Murray. (Second edition..). Retrieved from https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/interactive-data-visualization/9781491921296/
Palmeri, J., & McCorkle, B. (2017). A distant view of English Journal, 1912-2012. Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology and Pedagogy, 22(2). Retrieved from http://technorhetoric.net/22.2/topoi/palmeri-mccorkle/introduction.html
